okay good morning everyone uh not much
to report on terms of assignments all
good any questions things going well
okay all right so back to uh open
challenges in the field of evolutionary
robotics uh we started last time by
talking about uh one of the challenges
of evolving neural networks which is the
competing conventions problem we saw the
neat algorithm which is an attempt to
solve this neat has a lot of neat
problem properties one of them is that
it allows you to evolve neural networks
which as we'll see in a moment you can
then put back into robots for adaptive
Behavior we uh neat is very famous
hyperneat is another famous uh algorithm
which Builds on top of neat for a reason
which we have not talked about yet but
we will talk about in uh a few minutes
time we'll finish up our discussion of
hypernet uh in about half an hour and
then we'll move on to arguably the
biggest problem in evolutionary Robotics
and arguably in robotics in general
which is crossing the reality Gap no one
has figured out a good way to cross the
reality Gap despite several attempts to
do so okay before we get to the reality
Gap back to neat and Hyper neat just to
remind you of the problem competing
conventions neat was designed to solve
this by figuring out how to take two
different things like two different
parental neural networks and identify
parts inside of those two parental
structures that are likely to be
performing similar functions and the
idea behind neat of identifying this is
to keep track of The Descent of those
pieces if those two pieces in two
different neural networks have the same
common ancestral piece or derived from
the same common ancestral piece they're
likely to do similar things inside the
neural network and we're going to line
them up to do it yeah this has become
sort of the standard way the neat
algorithm has become the standard way to
evolve populations of neural networks to
do things we started last time by
talking about hypernet which as the name
of the algorithm uh implies Builds on
top of neat so in the hyper neat
algorithm we're still going to be
evolving populations of neural networks
to do things and we're going to mutate
and sexually recombine these neural
networks using the neat algorithm what
we just started to talk about last time
is what exactly are these neural
networks evolved to do in the hypernet
algorithm we didn't even get that far
what we started in on at the end of last
lecture was looking at how the neural
networks in the hypernet algorithm
behave we've seen a bunch of different
neural networks in this class so far
you've probably seen lots of other kinds
of neural networks in other classes the
neural networks that live inside of the
hypernet algorithm are known as cppns
not to be confused with
ctrnn that's a completely different
thing cppn the name stands for
compositional pattern producing
networks and as we saw at the end of
last
class they're called pattern producing
Network because they're neural networks
that produce patterns when we evaluate a
cppn we Define some space and for the
next few minutes we're going to
arbitrarily choose two dimensional
spaces because I can't draw in 3D so
we're going to choose a two-dimensional
space and we're going to construct
different kinds of cppn and see what
kind of patterns they produce inside
this two-dimensional space okay just a
refresher where we were last time any
questions about any of that from last
time before we push on okay so let's go
through this by actually creating some
cppns now and see how they work as you
can see uh in the cartoon up here the
input layer takes not sensor values or
pixels from some uh photograph that the
neural network is trying to categorize
cppn take as input coordinates positions
in some space since we're working
working in two Dimensions we'll do this
uh we'll do this with an X and A Y and
these can feed into an arbitrary neural
network with arbitrary cognitive
architecture to start with to build up
our intuition for cppn let's keep things
really really really simple we have two
input neurons X and Y and we have one
output neuron and because this pen is
failing I would use say black but we'll
go with gray this
morning okay here's our minimal cppn
architecture let's create uh let's
create let's add some synapses to this
let's take one synapse and connect the
left hand input neuron to the one output
neuron and we'll give this a weight of
one we'll keep things very simple you'll
remember back to our discussion about
neural networks we need one last thing
which is the activation function inside
of here when we take the weighted sum
arriving at this neuron we usually push
the result of that weighted sum through
a function for now we'll keep things
simple and again we'll assume the
identity function so whatever the raw
sum is that arrives here that's what's
going to come out of the output neuron
so far so good okay so let's now start
to evaluate this cppn let's take uh the
uh coordinate of
the origin 0 0 feed that into the input
layer and how much gray is the cppn
telling us to put at 0
0 hopefully you can all evaluate neural
networks in your head by now we're
feeding in 0 0 to the input layer what's
arriving at the output layer zero don't
put any gray here let's move to X = 0.1
y equal 0 how much gray is the cppn
telling us to put
here say that
again we've got 0.1 feeding in here and
zero
here 0.1 right we take the pre synaptic
neuron which is 0.1 at this time
multiply it by one drop it in here our
cppn is telling us to put 0.1 of gray
here put a little bit of gray how about
0.20 little bit more 0.2 you can see how
this goes I really need a different pen
here let's switch to Brown and hope that
this
works little bit
better
around okay we have evaluated part of
the cppn let's paint another row on top
so let's visit uh let's visit x = 0 y =
0.1 what is this cppn spit out when we
take that set of coordinates and feed it
into the input
layer nothing right we've got x equals z
and y equals 0.1 the amount of brown we
want to put here is zero what happens if
we put in
0.1.1 2.1 3. uh 3.1 4.1 1 Point
one comma .1 what's the pattern that
this cppn is going to produce in this
row same as the bottom one exactly right
we get a horizontal gradient where we
get increasing increasing amounts of
brown and you can convince yourself that
that continues this particular simple
cppn will paint a pattern of increasing
amounts of brown as we move from left to
right so far so good okay let's try
another
one let's create at random another
cppn what pattern does this cppn paint
into this two-dimensional
space same thing but rotated same thing
but rotated as there is more y as we
move up in this image this cppn is going
to dictate that we paint
more Brown into the
picture I'm really unlucky with my pens
this morning let me see if I've got
another
one black okay great all right
so let's try what's known as the inverse
problem instead of giving you a cppn and
having you run that cppn evaluation in
your head to predict what the pattern is
now I'm going to give you a pattern and
see if you can tell me a cppn that will
paint that
pattern increasing
amounts of black as we move up and to
the right can you construct a cppn that
would paint that pattern
twoes
two
synapses with a weight of one and one
okay so far so good okay so this is what
cppns do they paint patterns into uh
into a regular space why would we want
to do this we're almost at the
motivation for
cppns let's look at another detail of
cppns in the cartoon that you see over
here you'll notice that there are small
little inset figures inside each of
these 1 2 3 4 five six neurons that make
up this cppn what do you think those
little inset pictures
represent the fact that they're being
drawn inside the neuron is a very strong
hint activation fun they're activation
functions in a
cppn each neuron in a
cppn has a have different activation
functions this particular neuron here is
the identity function so it may be hard
to see from the back but inside each of
these neurons there's a little small X
and Y axes the x axis is representing
the value of the of the raw weighted sum
that's arriving at that neuron what's
coming
in the activation function takes what's
going in it goes to that position on the
horizontal x axis
and then according to its activation
function it finds the corresponding y
value at that horizontal position and
spits out that value along any outgoing
synapsis yeah so we're visualizing how
the activation function for each neuron
transforms its raw incoming signal into
a processed outgoing signal this one has
a uh identity function this one's got
something that looks vaguely like a
gaussian this one we haven't seen before
here's an activation function that has
some regular oscillatory repeating
pattern over time it's kind of
reminiscent of a central pattern
generator something that produces a
regular pattern over time but it's
hidden inside the neuron here's
something that is definitely a Galan
when we're when neat in the hyper neat
algorithm is evolving populations of
neural
networks the need algorithm can set not
just uh the number of neurons and which
neurons are wired up and what the
weights of those synapses are it also
encodes one additional detail that uh we
haven't included in the genome before
which is the activation function
associated with that neuron in
everything we've seen so far all the
neural networks we as the human
investigators usually picked an
activation function now we're going to
let hypernet do so or evolve activation
functions into these neurons why might
we want to do
that let's go back to our examp our
simple cppn over here and let's
place a sinusoidal activation function
inside and let's go back to our simpler
example of just a single synapse
connecting the X input neuron to the
single output neuron what pattern is
this cppn going to paint in our
two-dimensional
space a sign a sign of the amount of
black that we place right so maybe it
starts with a little bit of black more
black less black more black less black
more black and so on and then repeated
as we go yeah okay why did the authors
of hypernet construct such an
algorithm anybody have any intuitions
yet produces more diverse and complex
pns
same it it produces more diverse and
complex patterns is true it tends to
produce regular patterns so let's
imagine a slightly more complex
cppn let's create it at
random and we'll randomly throw a
sinusoidal activation function in here
we'll throw a Galan in here and maybe
the identity function into the
final output neuron down here we've got
two hidden neurons sorry two input
neurons two hidden neurons and one
output neuron we got a B we've randomly
wired up the neurons we've set some
random weights we've set some random
activation functions I don't know about
you but I haven't had enough coffee this
morning to actually work my way through
this and figure out what pattern it
produces but as you can probably guess
it's a mixture of regular gradations of
more or less black in this space and
maybe there's a little bit of gussian
noise here or there's a little bit of
Gan here so maybe we put a little bit of
black and then a little bit of more
black in the center and then less you
can imagine that what this cppn does is
to paint regular patterns and it's
composing these patterns together
question that kind of was my question
like with all those patterns it can kind
of compose any
absolutely so remember that no matter
what kind of neural network we're
talking about a regular vanilla neural
network a ctrnn a cppn ultimately all
these networks are functions they
transform their input into output
cppns embody a particular kind or class
of functions which is compositions of
coordinate
transforms which sounds intimidating but
you just saw that exactly right we're
taking all of the coordinates X Y and Z
and we're transforming them in a way
that we're painting patterns onto them
and the way that we're transforming and
painting these patterns is composed and
composed and composed together we get
gradations of uh regular patterns across
this two-dimensional space I constructed
this neural network at random and if
you've got time on your hands take half
an hour and code this up in Python and
connect it to matplot lib which you can
use to draw pictures and no matter how
randomly you make the ctrnn you are what
you're guaranteed not to
get is what you would do in the old days
with an old television set if you set it
to an unprogrammed TV channel You' get
white noise right that there'd be no
relationship between the color of this
pixel and the color of the pixel next to
it random cnns produce
nonrandom patterns that's why they're
called pattern producing not image
producing cppns guarantee that you're
going to get
non-random uh patterns you're going to
get things that slowly change over space
as we're painting into space everybody
see that okay I've held back the Y
why would you want to do this anybody
have a guess for why you might want to
do
this uh we're you're heading in the
right
direction you are not a random
collection of cells you are a set of
non-random patterns composed within
non-random patterns within non-random
patterns and so on there is a gradation
of physiological change across your five
fingers fingers aren't exactly the same
they're they're very close to one
another but they also are slightly
different as you walk from one finger uh
to the next the patterning in your arm
as you march from your shoulder out to
your fingertips as you start to M March
outward you see similar patterns of
bundles of muscle and bone and ligament
tendon and so on and that pattern
gradually changes as you move along the
body our uh insect brothers and sisters
that are made up of a whole bunch of
different segments now you can really
see not just regular patterns you can
see almost sinusoidal or repeating
patterns across the length of the insect
body there are segments but then in
these different segments there are
slightly different things going on
hypernet was inspired not by biological
evolution but by biological development
the way that every single multicellular
organism on this planet starts as a
single cell but as that single cell
divides and starts to make a larger and
larger and more complicated organism
made up of more and more cells what is
going on during that process of
development is fantastically complicated
and and a lot of that developmental
Machinery the stuff that's guiding
development the way you grow into a
multicellular organism is designed to
place patterns within patterns within
patterns within patterns you are a
composition of patterns all the way down
you are not some random collection of
cells development is not saying okay
there was one cell now there's two now
there's four now there's 860 now there's
a billion this IND idual cell you go
there this individual cell you go there
this individual cell you go there it's
too complicated you can't orchestrate
this huge mass of cells and things going
on by telling everybody exactly what to
do what you can try and do is influence
big masses of them so that they organize
into regular patterns across space and
time all the variety that we see out
there in nature if you look at every
single multicell cellular species there
is fantastic diversity but one of the
things we all share in common is we are
not just some random blob of cells there
is organization it's different
organization but it's organization of
patterns within patterns within
patterns okay that's uh this little
cartoon here was the author's Best
attempt to try and visualize this we've
got a two-dimensional space and in
theory you could probably invent a cppn
that would paint if we just imagine this
is a black and white picture it would
paint a sinusoidal pattern along the Y
AIS and they've shown this over here and
that might be composed with another part
inside the cppn that's painting black in
a gussian manner across the
xaxis and that could produce something
like you see here something in which
there is a go running up the YX AIS
we've got more than less than more than
less than more than less of black and
all of that black is bunched up at the
middle of the x axis everybody see that
okay so that could give us a regular
body plan here for some of these
segments we could have additional pieces
of the cppn that paint uh again some
more repeating patterns patterns with
slight variations as well and then it's
also possible if you compose a bunch of
Gans together Gans can kind of squash or
compress or Focus one part of the cppn
to paint one and only one unique pattern
at one and only one place in this
two-dimensional space you can sort of
get everything you need for creating
something that looks vaguely like an
organism repetition variation on a theme
symmetries uh and so and unique patterns
as well all within the same
cppn so far so
good okay all right let's test our
intuition about cppn we now know why
they are invented if we evolve
populations of
cppns we're searching the space of all
possible networks that can paint all
possible patterns I could draw any
unique pattern of black inside this
two-dimensional space
and with enough neurons and synapses you
or at least a machine could figure out a
cppn that would produce that
pattern if it was a random pattern of
white noise you'd need a very very very
very very very big cppn to do so smaller
random cppns tend to produce regular
patterns in space so when we're evolving
populations of cppn we're actually
forcing Evolution to spend most of per
time in one part of the space of all
possible patterns it's the space of all
patterns in which there is repetition
variation on a theme and so
on if we wanted if we created a fitness
function that said draw White Noise
Evolution could do it but it's got to
move out of this of its comfort zone of
patter of painting regular patterns If
instead we had a a fitness function that
said paint oscillating waves of black
from left to right in the
two-dimensional space it would be much
easier for hypernet to evolve such as
cppn this is something we haven't seen
before it is an evolutionary algorithm
but it's an evolutionary algorithm
designed such that the genotypes which
are the
cppns tend to produce phenotypes in a
particular part of the space the space
of all possible regular repeating
patterns in two-dimensional space make
sense question that's similar with
Evolution like
nature think all the different shapes
animals that there are absolutely yes so
in nature mutations are random so a
random Photon of light from the sun can
uh hit some part of your DNA
unfortunately and make a random change
anywhere in the DNA completely random
but the effect of that mutation if it
hits uh if it hits your sperm cell or
your egg cell depending on your sex and
that results in an offspring the result
of that mutation is going to be
nonrandom luckily your child is not
going to be a random collection of cells
it's a mutation into a different regular
pattern of cells absolutely so
biological evolution mutations are
random but the effects of mutations are
non-random and that phenomenon itself
has been evolved for very good reasons
if you need to survive long enough in
the world to eat and reproduce a good
way to do so is to be a regular
arrangement of cells not a random
arrangement of cells y good
observation okay all right so let's test
our intuition about cppn so far we've
kept things simple we've been painting
patterns of uh black and white into a
two-dimensional space in the cartoon
example here you can see that they're
actually painting in
color how might you alter the cognitive
architecture of a cppn so that now it
Paints in color rather than just
dictating amounts of black what would we
change four different
output different colors okay let's have
four output neurons what what are those
four colors or what are they going to
we're going to get numbers at these four
output neurons how are we going to
interpret those numbers in order to
paint and
color I guess like the of the
pixel uh we could the thickness of the
pixel we could pick whatever we want any
other ideas
like RGB plus
Al
okay for the non-computer graphics folks
in the audience what's Alpha uh opacity
opacity okay so now we're going to set
at least the input layer and the output
layer we're going to evolve with
hypernet populations of cppn where each
cppn has two inputs and four outputs and
maybe there's one cppn in the population
that looks like this and maybe elsewhere
in the population there's another cppn
that looks like this and remember we can
have activation functions inside of all
of these we are now going to paint
regular colored uh images inside here
where some of the pixels are going to
have more or less
opacity okay
great what happens if we want to paint a
regular pattern into three-dimensional
space let's stick with our colored
example
here what do we need to change about
cppn to paint inside a threedimensional
volume
absolutely XY Z and now we're going to
Define an empty 3D Volume and every time
we evaluate some random
cppn we're going to visit in a regular
pattern we're going to visit each
three-dimensional coordinate of that
lattice in that 3D space and we're going
to paint a color a
colorized image inside a 3D
Volume let's say we want to make a movie
we want to cpb and a generate a movie
how do we do
it this is part of the reason why
hypernet is so popular it's very
flexible okay let's go back to two
dimensions
and we'll add a third input which is T
or actually maybe let's call this F
which is the frame index of our movie
there's one last thing we need to do how
do we evaluate this cppn to produce a
movie we're going to make a movie frame
by frame let's start by painting frame
zero of the movie
first each time at each frame each time
at each frame so we're going to create
the zeroth frame in the movie so we're
going to set this input neuron to zero
and then visit all the XY in the frame
paint color onto all of those pixels in
frame zero we've now created the first
frame of the movie now we set f equals
to one we haven't changed the cppn it's
one cppn that's painting all the frames
in the movie and off we go make sense
everybody see
that let's say we want to now modify our
cppn to paint music I give you an empty
sheet of uh of musical bars and we
wanted to paint music onto
it it's five lines right for music
okay
we've made images we've made movies now
we're going to make
music
theut could be it's different ways we
could do
it other
ideas again the inputs are going to have
to match the space that you're trying to
fill correct so it might need to
each place on staff but also
tempor absolutely right
so I'm not a music person what are these
called these
lines
spots okay anyone watching this movie
who's a music person my apologies okay
spots along the staff right so we're
going to visit it each spot and then we
might have a binary output neuron that
tells us whether or not to place a note
at that position or not and we now need
again pardon my ignorance frame zero is
this we visit the next point in time on
the musical score and now maybe it
paints some
other notes uh at that point in time and
we now have a cppn that is generating
music yeah in all three examples
painting images painting movies painting
music we haven't said anything about the
fitness function yet like how good or
how poor this music is but you can
imagine the last step in evaluating the
phenotype the phenotype is now the image
the movie the musical score we apply a
fitness function for how good that image
is how good that movie is how good that
Musical score
is okay this is not a music class
however this is a robotics class so you
can probably guess where we're going
we're going to see an example uh in
that's taken from this paper here uh the
uh where the authors took the hypernet
algorithm and used it to paint behaviors
onto
robots
Okay okay this is just to rephrase what
we just said the dimensionality of the
hyper Cube the 2D space the 3D space the
4D space is determined by the dimension
of the input coordinates this is an
important point I want you to hold on to
this this is going to come back when we
apply this to
robotics okay here we go we as always
want to evolve a quadraped robot to move
as quickly as possible from left to
right so coming back we've taken quite a
Divergence away from robotics as usual
let's start by seeing if we can use this
hyperne algorithm to evolve quadruped
gates for a four-legged robot in
simulation first of all before we see
how this was done why might we want to
do this for those of you that have made
it to assignment 10 you've taken this
minimal three-link two-joint robot and
replaced it with a four-legged
quadrupedal robot
and you can probably evolve a gate for
this robot why would we go want to go to
a much more complicated evolutionary
algorithm to evolve gates for a
four-legged
robot what is it about hypernet that
might be of potential utility
here itat PN you
want we remember our discussion about
legged Locomotion we want patterns what
patterns
specifically patterns in space patter
patterns in
time yes both right remember the
ministry of silly walks all of those
walks were silly because they did well
actually they did have a rhythm to it
but not the one we're used to right
random commands to the muscles in your
legs are going to produce a sillary
possibly dangerous gate right not a good
way to move so what you're going to see
in this experiment is some things that
are familiar we're going to evolve
quadrupedal Locomotion the fitness
function is the same as always
displacement along the xaxis away from
the origin but this particular
evolutionary algorithm is going to bias
The evolutionary process towards
hopefully regular
Gates the problem of course is that the
evolutionary algorithm is not acting
directly on the motion of the the legs
of the robot what the evolutionary
algorithm typically acts on is the
synaptic weights of the neural
controller that controls the movement of
the legs so what do you think hypernet
is going to be used to do
here we know what we want it to do which
is indirectly bi a search towards
regular motions of
legs what do we want hypernet to do
this little cartoon should be a strong
hint okay so maybe paint sinusoidal
patterns through time that's kind of
what we want the legs to do right we
want the legs to describe some rhythmic
pattern through time but we are not
going to be painting in time
I'm reminded of some of the diagrams you
showed in previous classes like when the
feet were touching the ground those it's
like we're trying to go from those
patterns to movements of the limbs
rather than the other way around just
mapping where
the happens exactly so we're getting
there right we're trying to work kind of
Upstream we know where we want to get to
we want to get to a four-legged machine
that moves with some rhythmic pattern we
don't know what that rhythmic pattern is
if we did we just program it into the
machine we know generally that we want
something that
repeats for the Motions of the legs but
we're still there's still a bit of a gap
here right we can't the cppn can't regul
can't directly tell the leg go here go
here how are we going to close this Gap
there's one last step
here
it's a little difficult to see here but
what you're looking what you're looking
at here is a neural network that's got a
whole bunch of input neurons and you'll
notice that these input neurons have
certain uh names associated with them
we've got a hidden layer in here and
we've got an output layer back here so
this should be starting to look
familiar this is a neural network that's
going to control a quadrip we've got an
input layer with a whole bunch of
sensors in here a knee sensor or a knee
angle sensor touch sensors in the feet
uh angle sensors in terms of how much
the hip is rotated forward and back how
much the hip is rotated Inward and
outward starting to look familiar the
output layer here next is the next
torque sent to the
motors
so a lot is looking familiar here but
we're missing there's one thing that's
not drawn here what's not
drawn synapsis the synapses that's the
hint what is hypernet going to
do we've seen hypernet
paint images it's painted movies it's
painted music now for this neural
control of the robot hypernet is going
to conne Bingo there it is it is going
hypernet is going to paint regular
patterns of synaptic weights across the
synapses inside this neural network and
this neural network is embedded in a 3D
Volume that's what this cartoon is meant
to show
you the hope is that if the hypernet is
painting regular regular patterns of
Weights across a neural controller for a
robot that is going to translate into
regular oscillatory motions of the robot
that's the hope it's not obvious that
that's going to happen and that was the
goal of this project basically this
project embodies the following question
If evolution paints regular patterns of
uh synap weights across synapses in a
neural controller will that translate
into regular motions of the machine
that's being controlled by that
Network everybody get
it you can probably guess because we're
talking about this paper the answer is
yes and we'll see that in a moment okay
let's go through
how how hypernet paints regular patterns
into space this can be quite confusing
so bear with me remember that we're
running the we're running the hypernet
algorithm which means we're evolving
populations of
cppn okay each we're going to take each
cppn which is a neural network and we're
going to use that cppn to paint synaptic
weights onto a different neural network
so in this experiment that we're now
talking about there are two different
neural networks at work the former is
painting patterns onto the
ladder the cppn is not controlling the
robot the cppn paints regular patterns
onto the network that controls the
robot so far so good okay they have
chosen as I just mentioned to embed the
neural controller for the robot in
three-dimensional space which means that
every neuron in the neural network has a
unique XYZ coordinate that's going to be
important in a moment yeah in this
picture let's walk through this picture
so you can see how this works you can
see that the all of the 5 * 4 all of the
20 input neurons all of the 20 sensor
neurons they're all embedded in a 2d
sheet which in turn is embedded in this
three-dimensional space that's this gray
uh Square here the five * 4 20 hidden
neurons are embedded in a separate
two-dimensional space two-dimensional
sheet and then finally um they've got 20
motor neurons but they as you'll see in
a moment they only need three times 4
they only need 12 motor neurons for
their quadrupedal robot so we've got 20
input uh 20 sensor neurons 20 hidden
neurons and what did I just say 12 motor
neurons again all of those neurons have
their own unique XYZ coordinate so far
so good okay let's go back to the sensor
layer for a moment inside the sensor
layer they have arranged uh each row of
sensors is dedicated to one of the four
legs that makes up the quadrupedal robot
I haven't shown you the quadruped yet
but you can probably guess how this goes
okay so leg one let's just assume this
is this is the front left leg of the
robot there are five sensors inside uh
inside that leg um there is uh there is
one there three of these or sorry three
uh one two three three of these sensors
are proprioceptive sensors the first
proprioceptive sensor in the front left
leg indicates the angle of the hip how
forward or back the leg is is at the hip
the leg is attached to the main body at
the hip how much is that leg rotated
forward or back that's a floating Point
number the second proceptive sensor in
the front left leg reports how much that
front left leg is rotated inward towards
the body or outwards away from the body
how much that leg is flexed inward or
extended
outward third number is the uh angle of
the knee so we've got two propri
receptive sensors s sitting in the hip
and One proceptive sensor sitting in the
knee same thing for the front right leg
back left leg back right leg so far so
good okay fourth sensor in each leg
pretty straightforward it's a binary
value whether or not the tip of that leg
is in contact with the ground or not
ah sorry I misspoke there are not five
sensors in each leg there are four
sensors in each leg four times four and
then they snuck in some additional four
sensors here yaah pitch and roll it's a
little it's not drawn very well these
are not associated with any one leg
they're associated with the main
body they're obviously measuring the
yaah pitch and roll or orientation of
the main body you can also sense y'all
pitch and roll As you move about through
your
day
how thank you right inner ear right so
our robot has an inner ear and then
finally the 20th sensor neuron is
emitting a SOS soidal pattern this
should look familiar what is that neuron
simulating which is called in us in your
spine
Central pattern generator right in case
that's useful so not that we've seen
this before the only Innovation here is
they're embedding this in in a spatial
embedding in a two-dimensional
plane these are somehow going to be
wired up to the hidden layers we'll
assume for our purposes that every each
one of the 20 sensor neurons sends out a
synapse to connect to uh one of the
Hidden layers so we're going to have a
fully connected sensor to Hidden layer
so far so good so each of the 20 sensor
neurons connects to each of the 20
hidden neurons we have 20 * 20 400
synapses that are move that are uh
connecting the sensors to the hidden
neurons so far so good
question they not trying tot any
particular hypothesis onto on
conne are not
start correct exactly exactly so again
they haven't drawn the synapses here so
that you can paint your with your
imagination what those synapses might
look like so imagine we drew all 400
arrows coming out the back of these and
into the front
of these and imagine we drew the lines
of those synapses thicker if they were a
stronger weight or thinner if they were
a weaker weight a a weight closer to
zero if we did this in the way you're
doing it in the assignments you just see
some random collection of thick and thin
lines but with hypernet no matter what
cppn we create that paints weights onto
these synapses if we looked inside and
across these 400 arrows you'd see
regular increases and decreases of
thicker and thinner lines that would
visualize the internal uh regularity of
synaptic weights okay why you
whyw
not great question because it's harder
to think about it that way by embedding
it in a three-dimensional space we can
at least try and draw the cognitive
architecture what this neural network
looks like there's nothing that says we
couldn't take all of these neurons and
embed them in a higher dimensional space
and do exactly the same thing maybe it's
advantageous who knows it sounds like a
great final project idea to me you just
wouldn't be able to draw what that
neural network looks like easily you
could also embed all these neurons in a
two-dimensional space and paint regular
patterns in there as well is that better
or worse who knows hard to say they just
picked
3D okay let's keep going so we've got
400 synapses going from the input to the
hidden layer and imagine we fully
connect all these 20 hidden neurons to
these 12 output
neurons we've got four rows again each
row uh allocates motor neurons to that
leg so these are the three motor neurons
assigned to the front left leg these are
the three motor neurons assigned to the
front right leg and so on it does not
say on this picture where those three
motor neurons go in the leg but given
our description of the sensor neurons
you can probably guess where do the
three motor neurons go inside the
leg thep forward backward the
that's exactly it right so here's our
hint we know that the leg can rotate
Inward and outward at the hip and the
leg can rotate forward and backwards at
the hip which tells us that there are
actually two hinge joints there it is
not like our knee it's like our shoulder
or your our hip forward and back and
Inward and outward so we've got two
motor neurons that are controlling those
two degrees of freedom in the hip and
then the third one is controlling
pulling the knee got it okay so that's
the neurons we know uh we know the
distribution of sensors we've we've got
full full connections between inputs to
Hidden and hidden output finally thanks
for your patience now we can do the fun
part let's imagine a
cppn that's going to
paint patterns onto each and every one
of the synapses so when I introduced you
to cppn we walked through positions in a
two-dimensional space and at each point
we obtained a single floating Point
number which was the amount of black to
place at that position now we've got
synapses embedded in a three-dimensional
space we're going to visit each synapse
in turn and take the coordinate the
position of that synapse feed that
position in and we're going to have a
single output neuron
actually let's draw
this we've got our synapses in three
dimensional space so we need the XYZ
coordinate of a synapse and then we've
got a bunch of stuff going on inside and
we have one output neuron that we're
going to call W to remind us that the
value arriving here the floating Point
number is going to paint that weight
onto the synapse at that position
same cppn we're going to call that cppn
400 times to paint 400 weights onto the
400 synapses between the input and hi
hidden layer take the same cppn and
paint all weights onto all the synapses
that are going from the hidden to the
output layer so the neurons are arranged
in XYZ space y so this would generate
one value for each neuron but you need
one value for each yep and so each
individual neur
needs
vales okay we a good observation so
deliberately I'm making things simple
and it's too simple it's not going to
work but we're going to see I want you
to see if you can see exactly why it's
not going to
work we can uh if we take this synapse
it's got a if we take a position if we
take a synapse that is in
three-dimensional space it starts at
some ner NE that has a unique XYZ
coordinate and and it ends at another
neuron that has a unique XYZ coordinate
the center of that synapse also has some
XYZ coordinate everything in here all
neurons and all synapses are embedded in
a three-dimensional space so when I said
we're going to take the cppn and visit
each synapse let's actually visit the
centroid of each synapse we're we're
dealing with this neural Network
geometrically now we're going to visit
each centroid take the XYZ coordinate of
the centroid of that synapse and get
back a weight from the cppm 0.4 let's
say so we're going to get floating Point
values for all of these synapses but as
Nate has started to in it there's
something wrong with this process what
is it not necessarily wrong but there's
something that's limiting us
here
we're using cppn so we know it's going
to paint arbitrary regular patterns
across all of these synapses which is
good that's what we want but we're
actually hobbling ourselves here a
little bit some there's something that's
holding us
back some have the same thank you
exactly so let's look at this sensor
neuron up here and Visually I want you
to paint a synapse that goes from this
neuron to this hidden
neuron imagine now we we visit this
neuron and imagine the synapse that
connects it to this neuron those two
synapses which both are embedded in
three-dimensional
space are going to have the same
centroid so tell me about the two
weights for these two synapses that
share a
centroid they're going to get the same
weight right no matter what the
cognitive no matter what cppn we apply
to this network it's going to be forced
it has to assign the same weight to sets
of synapses that share a
centroid now this might not actually
even be a problem we might be able to
evolve neural controllers for a
quadruped such that it exist exhibits
regular patterns over time but if you're
mathematically inclined something
doesn't quite sit right with this it
would be nice to roll back this
unnecessary constraint how might we do
it there's different ways we can do it
there's one particular way that the
authors did it they weren't they didn't
like this they made one change so that
this they made one change to the
cognitive architecture of the cppn so
that it could paint different weights on
synapses that share a centroid how do
you think they did
it any
ideas inad of looking at C look at the
point little bit along the line show you
the vector yeah you could so instead of
the centroid maybe we take a point 34s
of the way along the synapse towards its
post synaptic neuron that that would
work that's not what they did you could
still I guess maybe you could still end
up with them like Crossing maybe yeah it
depends yeah you'd have to work it out
you probably could pick a point at which
they don't if you went in and actually
measured things and like all good
scientists these scientists who I know
well they were a little lazy they didn't
they didn't do it that
way they introduced a little
mathematical trick so that they didn't
have to measure anything they could be
pretty secure that the cppn would feel
free to paint unique weights even if
synapses shared a
cite any
ideas they introduc a random number to
the uh you could introduce a random
number but that makes things hard for
evolution right because now we're
changing things every time Evolution
goes to evaluate a
cppn this is not trivial so it's okay
I'll give you a hint cam mentioned a few
minutes ago why not embed these things
in higher
Dimensions uh okay you're getting very
close now so this neural network the
network that controls the robot is
trapped in three dimensional space but
they started
to uh they started to add in put neurons
to the
cppns that we're painting patterns onto
this so this gets a little bit tricky
we're juggling two different kinds of
neural networks the cppns and the robot
neural controllers and now we're going
to start juggling dimensionalities the
neural controller is embedded in
three-dimensional space but the cppn is
going to paint in higher dimensional
space you you mention one idea which
could be we're going to add some sort of
neuron or synapse index in very much
like we saw in in the movie example
right where we had a frame index for
frames in the
movie that's that's actually one way you
could do it that's not the way they did
it they added three additional input
neurons which means they now have a cppn
that's painting regular patterns inside
a six dimensional
volume I hope you had your caffeine this
morning okay there's the hint three
additional uh input neurons what are
they first are the starting neurons
location the T
absolutely okay so here we go remember
that every synapse has a pre synaptic
neuron the place where the synapse
originates and every synapse has a post
synaptic neuron which is the neuron at
which that synapse terminates we've got
pre and post that's two p
so that's not going to work for us let's
go for pre R is in Pre and O is in post
so they're going to feed they're going
to visit each Nur uh each synapse in
turn and they're going to feed into the
cppn the X Y and Z coordinate of the
pre synaptic neurons 3D position and
they're going to supply the XY and Z
coordinate of the post aptic neuron at
which the synapse
terminates okay let's
summarize we're going to evolve neural
controllers for a simulated quadrupedal
robot that neural controller looks more
or less like we're we're comfortable
with the neural controller of the robot
is embedded in three-dimensional space
we're going to evolve not the neural
controllers we're going to evolve
populations of cppns
so the genotype in this evolutionary
algorithm are
cppns each genotype is going to paint
synaptic weights onto this neural
controller using Six
Dimensions once the cppn has finished
painting the synaptic weights onto the
neural
controller this neural controller is the
phenotype of the
cppn the neuron
in the neurons and synapses inside the
cppn is the genotype the stuff that neat
is going to operate
on the phenotype is the neural
controller to which we're going to
assign
Fitness so far so good we're putting
everything together here so we've got a
population of cppns we've taken the
first cppn painted weights onto the
neural controller we let the simulated
quadrip be controlled by that neural
controller we measure how far that
simulated robot travels from the origin
which gives us back a floating point
value how far it traveled that's the
fitness of that
cppn go to the second cppn it paints
neural control under the quadrip head
and rinse and
repeat got it
Emily the the cppn is painting regular
patterns into a six-dimensional space
which is then interpreted back down into
three dimensions
right this this is the advantage of of
higher Dimensions when you work in
higher Dimensions things tend not to
overlap as much right the lower
Dimensions you go to whatever it is
you're working with sets of synaptic
weights mathematical structures you tend
to get a lot of overlap you can pull
stuff apart by going to higher
Dimensions it's a very very common trick
in mathematics hopefully here you see
exactly why we're doing
it
okay okay so here's my little cartoon of
how this works we're feeding in uh the
coordinates in six-dimensional space of
each uh synapse passing it through a
cppn and it gives us back the weight
this is kind of the the key of this
whole thing okay okay we already
actually said this
you can fill this in on your
own okay so here we go remember that the
question the authors wanted to answer
was does hypernet make it easier for
evolution to discover regular gates for
the quadruped compared to other things
so what they did was to create the other
thing this is called the control the
thing that's missing
hyperne they called this um f neat or
fix topology neat this is a little
confusing um I don't really like this
control but this is what they use so
here we go um they use the same neural
controller the same neural net as in
hypernet they use this
thing um but now uh that allowed for
mutation and crossover but not the
addition removal of neurons and
synapses so they're they're sort of
fixing this uh they're removing all of
the good stuff about hyperne the ability
for hyperne to paint regular patterns in
space I think just you'll have to trust
me on this if you're interested in the
details you can go and read the paper
but we're going to look at two different
uh algorithms hypernet is the algorithm
we just talked about the control is
everything is exactly the same but
they've removed the ability of hypernet
to paint regular patterns in space
they've hobbled hypernet in a certain
way it's kind of collapsed back down
from hyper neat to neat I think we won't
go into the details just have to trust
me on this okay all right okay let's
watch some
movies okay this is the best most fit
gate or the most fit neural controller
they got from the control experiment The
evolutionary algorithm that could not
paint regular patterns of synaptic of
regular patterns of Weights across the
Sy
axis how's it
doing it's
okay there's a little there's a little
bit of rhythmicity here but not quite if
you watch any one leg you'll see that it
might be in Phase it might be moving
with one of the other legs but then kind
of falls out of phase with it
if this robot could sweat it' be
sweating right this is there's a lot of
exertion here there's a lot of points in
which the leg hits rotated forward which
stops motion it's lost its momentum this
is not this is a silly walk this is not
a very efficient way to move this is the
best neural controller they got from the
control experiment that was evolving
sets of synaptic weights for this neural
controller but no regular patterns
within the neural
controller this is a little confusing
I'll explain this as we watch it this is
the worst evolved gate which actually
means the the worst of the best so they
evolved with hypernet so they're
evolving regular patterns of Weights
across the neural network they ran
hypernet once and got the best the most
fit neural controller out of that
evolutionary algorithm then they went
back and created a different random
population of cppn and ran hypernet a
second time and took the most fit neural
controller out of that second run now
they've got two highly fit neural
controllers ran hypernet again third
time a bunch of times so they had a set
of Champions these were the most fit
individuals from a whole set of
independent evolutionary runs and among
all of those
Champions they took the worst one the
worst Champion it's a little confusing
the worst of the best it seems like it
wouldn't be that hard to like just
directly program a robot just like all
his legs at once yes absolutely isn't
the point that we're trying to get it to
do stuff that's harder than we can
design ourselves yes yes absolutely th
for this simple robot you could probably
go in and you're all good enough
roboticist now you could probably pre
preprogram it to do so you might
remember the hex the nonap from the
beginning of this course that weird
metal tubing type robot that had nine
legs that you also wanted it to move in
that particular robot there were 12
Motors so you'd have to control 12
Motors give that a try see if you can
sit down and figure out a way for that
thing to move with a regular gate it
doesn't take a lot more mechanical
complex it I can put a few more joints
and links on here where it suddenly
becomes very difficult to figure out how
to program a regular gate for it
especially if it's moving over uneven
terrain and it's being buffeted by wind
and somebody comes along and drops a
200b backpack onto its back not so easy
to do in that case so you're right this
demonstration is maybe a little bit
underwhelming because you could probably
do just as well you can try and run this
on a more complex robot and see how
things go okay so this is the best of
the worst how is this one
doing got a regular gate right so it
works you can actually uh you can use
cppns to paint regular patterns of
synaptic weights inside the neural
controller of this robot and you tend to
get regular patterns of
motion we've spent most of the morning
talking about how uh how synapses are
tuned inside of a maybe not complicated
neural network but getting there what do
you think's going on in your own
head you tend to do most things with a
regular pattern arrayed over space and
time it's not quite known yet about
synapses but neurons definitely seem to
have regular patterns inside our Central
and peripheral nervous system it's it it
looks on first pass it looks like some
random jumble jumble of uh neurons most
of the last hundred years of
Neuroscience and neural physiology
dissecting neural networks has been to
answer that question is it actually just
a random tangle of neurons and synapses
the answer is at least in the way it's
wired up absolutely not there are
definitely regular patterns and not just
regular
patterns but compositions of regular
patterns you get teeny tiny little
neural modules that are made up of just
a handful of neurons that are wired up
in a particular way and that little neat
packet seems to be replicated into a
larger structure that's made up of these
smaller structures those larger neural
modules are again replicated in the
brain some of them are replicated with
variation you see pattern composed
within pattern composed within pattern
within biological neural systems which
suggests although it is not yet been
proven that that tends to bias our Form
and Function towards forms and functions
that unroll over time and space in
regular ways rather than random ways so
maybe hypernet which was only designed
to help with AI and Robotics problems
might suggest or give us ideas about why
biological nervous systems are arranged
in the way that they're
arranged
eighto like the sensory mot neurons in
the brain are actually spatially
organized oh yeah that's right the and
the organization is not necessarily
non-intuitive it's organ the as you
mentioned the sensory and motor parts of
your brain are arranged in a regular
pattern which actually matches more or
less one to one your actual physiology
and actually we'll see this we're going
to see what's called the motor
homunculus in a few weeks in this class
we'll come back to exactly this
point okay I think that was all the fun
movies I had for
today the best of the best well if this
is the best of the worst you can imagine
the best of the best is even better than
that okay all right we've got a grand
total of 2 minutes left so all I want to
do today is just introduce the next
problem we're going to try and solve
which no one has solved yet the reality
Gap um the re we're going to see I guess
on Thursday we're going to see an
evolutionary robotics experiment that
dates all the way back to the beginning
of evolutionary robotics which was in
1994 in that paper they introduced this
term they introduced this problem the
reality Gap we're going to see that they
simulated some robots and then tried to
transfer them to reality and it didn't
work so well um that was
1994 in
2018 this lovely company here came along
and said listen there's this problem in
robotics that none of you have
identified yet we're going to call it
the domain randomization problem and we
are the one and only company that's
going to be able to solve this problem
all great all great problems are
reinvented or rediscovered every 20
years or so so uh this is a very big and
very real problems that some very big
and powerful corporations are trying to
solve it all started with a modest
evolutionary robotics paper from
1994 which we'll talk about uh not on
Thursday we'll talk about it next
Tuesday you have a quiz due tonight some
of you are working on assignment uh nine
some of you are working on D4 see you
then